---
layout: distill
title: test
description: an example of a distill-style blog post and main elements
tags: distill formatting
giscus_comments: true
date: 2021-05-22
featured: true


# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Equations
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2
  - name: Citations
  - name: Footnotes
  - name: Code Blocks
  - name: Interactive Plots
  - name: Layouts
  - name: Other Typography?

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }
---

## Equations

Climatologists, farmers, and other essential decision-makers are holding their breath as the potential development of a La Niña event hangs in the balance. The development of an La Niña event is on the caps to be decided. 
For Australia, La Niña is often associated with increased rainfall, which can significantly impact agriculture and water resources. The uncertainty surrounding this event means that planning ahead becomes both essential and challenging.
Recently, the Bureau of Meteorology, keeping a close eye on the latest observations and modelling results, has raised its ENSO outlook to a La Niña watch, indicating a 50% chance that La Niña could develop in the coming months.
However, many are wondering why this La Niña signal is emerging so late. Typically, signs of ENSO events are observed earlier in the year, giving scientists and decision-makers more time to prepare for the associated impacts.

---

## Citations

Citations are then used in the article body with the `<d-cite>` tag.
The key attribute is a reference to the id provided in the bibliography.
The key attribute can take multiple ids, separated by commas.

The citation is presented inline like this: <d-cite key="gregor2015draw"></d-cite> (a number that displays more information on hover).
If you have an appendix, a bibliography is automatically created and populated in it.

Distill chose a numerical inline citation style to improve readability of citation dense articles and because many of the benefits of longer citations are obviated by displaying more information on hover.
However, we consider it good style to mention author last names if you discuss something at length and it fits into the flow well — the authors are human and it’s nice for them to have the community associate them with their work.

---

## Footnotes

Just wrap the text you would like to show up in a footnote in a `<d-footnote>` tag.
The number of the footnote will be automatically generated.<d-footnote>This will become a hoverable footnote.</d-footnote>

---

## Code Blocks

Syntax highlighting is provided within `<d-code>` tags.
An example of inline code snippets: `<d-code language="html">let x = 10;</d-code>`.
For larger blocks of code, add a `block` attribute:

<d-code block language="javascript">
  var x = 25;
  function(x) {
    return x * x;
  }
</d-code>

**Note:** `<d-code>` blocks do not look good in the dark mode.
You can always use the default code-highlight using the `highlight` liquid tag:

{% highlight javascript %}
var x = 25;
function(x) {
return x \* x;
}
{% endhighlight %}

---

## Interactive Plots

You can add interative plots using plotly + iframes :framed_picture:

<div class="l-page">
  <iframe src="{{ '/assets/plotly/demo.html' | relative_url }}" frameborder='0' scrolling='no' height="500px" width="100%" style="border: 1px dashed grey;"></iframe>
</div>

The plot must be generated separately and saved into an HTML file.
To generate the plot that you see above, you can use the following code snippet:

{% highlight python %}
import pandas as pd
import plotly.express as px
df = pd.read_csv(
'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/plotly/datasets/master/earthquakes-23k.csv'
)
fig = px.density_mapbox(
df,
lat='Latitude',
lon='Longitude',
z='Magnitude',
radius=10,
center=dict(lat=0, lon=180),
zoom=0,
mapbox_style="stamen-terrain",
)
fig.show()
fig.write_html('assets/plotly/demo.html')
{% endhighlight %}

---

## Details boxes

Details boxes are collapsible boxes which hide additional information from the user. They can be added with the `details` liquid tag:

{% details Click here to know more %}
Additional details, where math $$ 2x - 1 $$ and `code` is rendered correctly.
{% enddetails %}

---


