---
layout: distill
title: Gabi und Hans
description: an example of a distill-style blog post and main elements
tags: distill formatting
giscus_comments: true
date: 2021-05-22
featured: false


# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: Equations
    # if a section has subsections, you can add them as follows:
    # subsections:
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 1
    #   - name: Example Child Subsection 2
  - name: Citations
  - name: Footnotes
  - name: Code Blocks
  - name: Interactive Plots
  - name: Layouts
  - name: Other Typography?

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }
---

Climatologists, farmers, and other essential decision-makers are holding their breath as the potential development of a La Niña event hangs in the balance. The development of an La Niña event is on the caps to be decided. 
For Australia, La Niña is often associated with increased rainfall, which can significantly impact agriculture and water resources. The uncertainty surrounding this event means that planning ahead becomes both essential and challenging.
Recently, the Bureau of Meteorology, keeping a close eye on the latest observations and modelling results, has raised its ENSO outlook to a La Niña watch, indicating a 50% chance that La Niña could develop in the coming months.
However, many are wondering why this La Niña signal is emerging so late. Typically, signs of ENSO events are observed earlier in the year, giving scientists and decision-makers more time to prepare for the associated impacts.


---

## La Nina could be declared this summer

ENSO events have a well-documented history of triggering devastating global natural disasters. The 2015-16 El Niño, for example, affected nearly 60 million people across Africa, Latin America, the Caribbean, and the Asia-Pacific, leading to widespread droughts, floods, food insecurity, disease outbreaks, malnutrition, and respiratory issues.
Following the rare "triple-dip" La Niña from 2020-2023, Australia is bracing for the potential impacts of yet another La Niña event. The looming threat brings concerns of heavy rainfall and heightened flooding risks across the country.
Should La Niña be declared in 2024, it would mark the fourth ENSO event in just five years—an unusually active period for ENSO, though not without historical precedent. As Australia watches closely, the possible arrival of La Niña adds urgency to preparing for what could be another season of extreme weather.

---
